Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops and
today I'm joined by Adam Bo. He is an
interdisciplinary romantic love and human mating researcher who employs
an ethological framework in his theory and analysis. We're
going to talk about that. Today he's currently enrolled
in a PhD in biological anthropology at the Australian
National University School of Archaeology and Anthropology, and he
holds a position as a sessional academic at Federation
University Australia in the Institute of Health and Well-being.
And today, we're going to explore the topic of
romantic love. So, Adam, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
My pleasure as well.
So, first of all, let's start perhaps here with
a definition or an understanding of romantic love. So
what is romantic love?
It's a good question, cause, uh, it's a little
bit muddy. So what I mean when I say
romantic love is, it's that thing that happens at
the beginning of a romantic relationship, where you go
a little bit crazy and think your partner is
the best thing ever. It's essentially a motivational state
associated with intense cognitions, emotions and behaviors. And it
says a number of reproductive functions. It's, uh, commonly
associated with the early stages of a romantic relationship
that can exist in the absence of a romantic
relationship in something called unrequited love, and it can
less commonly exist after many years or decades or,
or even a lifetime. Uh, IT used to be
called passionate love, uh, in the 80s and 90s.
Uh, Elaine Hatfield coined that term, and she's the
grandmother of romantic love research. Um, BUT that's really
only a term used in the humanities these days,
with a, with a few minor exceptions. But if
any of your watchers are reading a paper on
passionate love, that's the same thing as romantic love.
Um, IT contrasts with companionate love, which is that
less intense type of love associated with feelings of
companionship that long-term married couples have. Um, AND the
way I use it is basically the way that
psychologists and big names in the area use it.
So, I do, Sandra Langislag does, Arthur Aaron, Bianca
Acevedo, Monazu. We all use the term romantic love.
Uh, AND that's the convention, uh, I. See in
the science. Uh, THAT being said, it's, it's a
little bit muddy, because there are a number of
researchers, mainly people from outside the science, who do
a sporadic or a one-off, uh, paper on the
topic of love, who use the term romantic love
to mean any love in a romantic relationship. So
they could be referring to romantic love or companionate
love. And, uh, this is problematic because it's, it's
a bit confusing. Uh, IT can lead to bad
science. Um, FOR example, I read a paper recently,
in meta-analysis of FMRI studies. So a big, big
study that I took a lot of time and
energy to do. And now we're testing the hypothesis
related to romantic love. Uh, AND they did set
it up quite well in the introduction. But they
made the mistake in the analysis to include studies
of people experiencing both romantic love and companionate love.
And this resulted because of the confusion about the
term romantic love. So I'll just, uh, say to
your watchers, when you're reading a paper and someone
says romantic love, try to make sure you understand
what they're actually talking about. Hopefully they'll define what
they're talking about. Um, BUT, uh, just be very
careful because we don't want that confusion to, to
continue.
Right. I mean, when it comes to the transition
from romantic love to companionate love, is there a
specific time frame we're talking about here? I mean,
how long does romantic love tend to last?
Uh, WE'RE not really sure. Scientists haven't been really
good at determining that. There haven't been sufficient longitudinal
studies. So there's been a, a few longitudinal studies,
but I'm looking at this in particular. Um, THE
indications I get from the summer of research I've
read is it's in the vicinity of about 18
months when a Couple is in love with each
other. Um, THERE'S gonna be variation with that. Some
people will be in love for only 1 year,
some for maybe 3 years. Uh, BUT in that
1 to 2 year period seems to be about
right. And, uh, there's evolutionary reasons why that might
be the case. And I'm sure we're gonna get
to some of those as, as we go on.
What are the most common, I mean, let's call
them symptoms, I guess, of romantic love.
Uh, SO, once again, nobody's done a really good
job at really pinpointing this. There are a number
of scales that involve a number of items measuring
the cognitions, emotions, and behaviors of romantic love. And
so one common Thing seems to be a desire
for reciprocity. Um, WHEN you're in love with someone,
you want them to love you back. Another one
is sort of, um, what I refer to as
hypermanic-like features. So elevated mood and physiological arousal seems
to be common. Uh, OBSESSIVE thinking about a partner,
so, um, repetitive thoughts about the loved one is
also quite common, and we tend to have an
inflated sense of the other as well. So we,
we tend to think, um, our loved one is
a lot better than they probably are.
I mean, uh, 6 years ago, I had a
conversation on the show with the late Doctor Helen
Fisher and she uh she told me about some
of the symptoms of romantic love she had studied
and she mentioned things like uh being obsessed with
the person, I mean, spending all day thinking about
the person and then Uh, some sleep deprivation sometimes
and losing appetite. I mean, is that something that
you've also found or other romantic love researchers found
in your research or not?
Um, SO I'm familiar with Helen's work on the
topic and, and in particular, a 1998 paper where
she described The, um, psychological features of romantic love.
And she did a very good job. Uh, A
lot of that was drawn off earlier work by
Dorothy Tenov in 1979, who wrote a book, Love
and Limerance. Um, Helen's articulation of the psychology of
romantic love in that 1998 paper is, is absolutely
spot on. I, I, I don't have any, uh,
qualms with what she said there.
OK. So explain how you approach the study of
romantic love by combining approaches from biological anthropology, human
ethology, and psychology. How, how do you go about
combining them and what do you draw from each
of them?
So I guess you'd say that I'm both a
multidisciplinary and an interdisciplinary researcher. So I'm multidisciplinary in,
in the sense that, like you've alluded to, uh,
I, uh, undertake studies in biological anthropology and psychology.
And most of my biological anthropology work to date
has been looking at selective pressures and their relationship
to the evolution of reproductive states, particularly social monogamy
and paternal investment. Um, BUT I've also developed with
Phil Cabin. ARE from the University of Canberra and
the University of South Australia. What I understand is
the world's largest data set of people experiencing romantic
love. It's called the Romantic Love Survey 2022, and
the cross-sectional aspects available online. Anybody can go and,
um, access that data and do studies if they
want. Um, AND that's allowed me to investigate sort
of evolutionary ideas related to romantic love, um, but
also just the modern environment and how romantic love
looks, uh, today. Uh, SO some of the evolutionary
ideas I've looked at are, are things like sexual
selection by investigating sex differences, or variation in the
expression of romantic love. We know that variation's a
necessary element, uh, for evolution to occur. Um, AND
the survey studies have also even allowed us to
gain some insights into the mechanisms, which I've Back
to, um, evolutionary history. Uh, THAT being said, I've
also just looked at sort of the modern world,
and I've got interesting papers on like SSRIs and
romantic love, uh, and currently doing a paper on
risky driving and romantic love. Uh, SO there's a
whole heap of gaps that are, are basically just
being filled. Now, I'm interdisciplinary in that. I use
Tim Bergen's 4 question as an overarching framework in
all of my research. So Nico Tinbergen was a,
a ethologist, someone who studies animal behavior. He won
a Nobel Prize with some others in the 60s,
I believe, uh, for his work in this area.
And in 1963, he wrote a really informative paper
saying that if you want to have a comprehensive
understanding of any behavior. You need to approach it
from 4 perspectives. And those perspectives are considering the
mechanisms that cause the behavior, the ontogeny or its
development across the lifespan, uh, the evolutionary functions that
the behavior serves, as well as the hologeny. Um,
AND I have basically applied this to both my
biological anthropology and psychology research, which means I'm not
siloed, and I can draw on a full breadth
of evidence wherever it comes from. It's pretty useful
in making sense of existing findings, so previous research,
but it's also good at generating ideas that can
be tested, and that's something that's really been missing
from the science of romantic love. Um, SO the
bioA research I do tells us about the selective
pressures that cause social monogamy and in turn, romantic
love. And the psychology research tells us about the
mechanisms of romantic love as well as the functions
and the evolutionary history. And I, I found this
to be quite a useful means of, of undertaking
the research, and I, I think it's a useful
contribution to the science.
Yeah, we're going to go through Tim Bergen's for
questions applied to romantic love just in a bit.
But before that, do we know whether romantic love
is a human universal? I mean, do we have
any idea whether it is present across all studied
human societies or not?
So it's a good question, and it's one that
I get asked a lot. So, I, I'll give
you the short answer. I think it is probably
a human universal, but we don't have the sufficient
evidence to be saying that unequivocally. Uh, THE best
way I've heard it defined is it's either a
universal or a near human universal. Uh, AND there's
two lines of evidence to consider, uh, when considering
whether it's a universal. And the first is a
seminal study by Bill Jan Koviak and Edward Fisher
in 1992, which was an ethnographic analysis of a
whole heap of ethnographies of 166 cultures from the
standard cross cult. SURVEY, and they looked at these
166 cultures, and they found ethnographic evidence of romantic
love in 145 cultures. So that's by far most
of them. Uh, THEY do note that just because
they didn't find evidence doesn't mean that romantic love
doesn't exist there. It just means that the ethnographers
didn't, uh, detail it. Now, uh, we have reason
to believe that romantic love evolved before modern humans
emerged, um, so it is possible that, uh, it
is a universal feature, but some ethnic groups may
have lost, Uh, romantic love, uh, over generations. Um,
BUT, uh, a study I've done, uh, looking at,
uh, the hologeny of, of non-human primates, uh, specifically
territoriality and social monogamy, a paper I'm doing with,
uh, Katherine Blolia from the Australian National University, and
Simon Greenhill from the University of Auckland. We basically
found that in non-human primates, social monogamy is never
lost when a species is territorial. Now modern humans
are territorial, so it would be unique among primates
for us to have lost it at any stage.
And so for that reason, I think it's unlikely
that any ethnic groups probably entirely lost romantic love.
And it's for those reasons, I think romantic love's
probably a human universal.
You know, I think this is a very interesting
question because sometimes we hear from people, from the
humanities that uh the suggestion that romantic love is
a social construct, that it's basically. Uh, CONSTRUCT of
the Western culture from uh and started a few
centuries ago with the romantics and people like that.
I, I, I mean, does that hold any water
or
not? None at all. Um, WE'VE got sufficient evidence,
uh, to show that social monogamy is very, very
old, long before modern humans. Uh, SOCIAL monogamy assumes
to some extent romantic love, because romantic love causes
social monogamy, at least for, uh, a, a period.
Um, THERE'S been a number of studies looking at
love, uh, cross-culturally. Uh, I recently, uh, studied a
paper led by Some amazing researchers at the University
of Ratzlab in Poland that looked at love, not
explicitly romantic love, but love, uh, in a romantic
relationship across nine cultures from non-weird societies. And, and
there's strong evidence of, of love in, in those
nine societies, there's lots of other studies that have,
have looked at many, many cultures. Everywhere you actively
go and look for it. Uh, THERE is romantic
love. Uh, I think. So when it comes to
whether it's a recent invention, um, culture has, at
different stages, uh, repressed and promoted romantic love. So
there probably have been times where, um, people have
experienced romantic love more. Obviously, um, I think you've
had Matt Larsson on recently, who talked about the,
the trajectory of, of, uh, courtship and, and those
sorts of things over the subsequent, uh, generations. So,
um, it, it, there have been periods where it's
been more common and less common and, and obvious
and, and secret and that sort of stuff. But,
uh, the basic biological motivational state has been around
for a very long time.
OK, so let's talk then about Tim Bergen's 4
questions. I mean, let's explore romantic love through these
lens. First of all, which mechanisms are behind romantic
love?
Uh, I'll, um, in response to that question, I'll
focus on the biological mechanisms, cause that's where we
have the most research. And there are psychological make
choice mechanisms like make preferences, attraction, and sexual desire,
um, that certainly play a role, but, um, we
haven't got a lot of research about how they
link in with romantic love. There's also social mechanisms
like familiarity and the feeling of needs, but there's
only been a couple of studies, so I can't
really go into detail on that. Uh, BUT in
terms of the biology of romantic love, there's been
40 biological studies of romantic love, approximately 30, uh
neuroimaging studies, about 10 endocrinological studies. And I think
there's been two genetic studies. And, um, B and
Kushnick a paper I wrote with my supervisor at
the time. Jeff Kushnick in 2021. We, um, went
through all the evidence and we summarized the FMRI
findings as indicating involvement in four broadly defined sets
of circuitry. So those are reward and motivation, emotions,
sexual desire, and social cognition. So reward and motivation
uh is most associated with the dopaminergic mesolimbic pathway.
So that's structures like the ventral tegmental area, nucleus
accumbens, amygdala, and medial prefrontal cortex. The emotion areas
are structures like the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex and
insula. Sexual desire and arouses, things like the chordate,
insular, putamen, and anterior cingulate cortex, and social cognition
areas like the amygdala, insular, and medial prefrontal cortex.
Um, WHAT I do want to tell your watchers
is you need to be cautious when interpreting FMRI
studies. So it might surprise them to know that
the test, retest reliability of task FMRI studies is
only about 0.3. So the chance of getting the
same findings in the same lab with the same
people is actually pretty small. So you can't draw
inferences from just a, a single study. You really
need to have quite, quite a number of studies
showing the same things. And all those structures that
I've just listed have been repeatedly shown in FMRI
studies to, uh, to be associated with romantic love.
Uh, WHEN it comes to neurotransmitters and neurohormones, uh,
there's strong theoretical and empirical evidence to show that
dopamine, oxytocin, and opioids, most likely beta endorphin, play
an important role. But there is some suggestion that
other neurotransmitters and neurohormones play a role, such as
serotonin, cortisol, testosterone, and nerve growth factor. Um, THAT
being said, endocrinological studies are also notoriously noisy and
inconsistent. So, for example, there's been 4 studies looking
at cortisol in romantic life. And like, you won't
believe me, all 4 studies came up with different
findings. Uh, SO, uh, once again, you can't just
rely on a single endocrinological study, uh, to, to
know what's going on in romantic life. You've really
got to have quite a number all investigating the
same thing.
Uh, WHEN it comes to the second question, which
is related to development, what do we know about
the development of romantic love?
Uh, SO this is probably, uh, the one of
Tim Bergen's 4 questions that we know least about.
Uh, WHAT we do know is that romantic love
can actually express in juveniles. So there's been 2
studies that have shown, uh, the presence of romantic
love in people under the age of 12. Now,
when they experience romantic love, it tends not to
be associated with the strong, uh, romantic attraction and
sexual desire that you would normally find in romantic
love. Uh, AND it looks like romantic love with
all its features seems to manifest after puberty. Um,
IT seems to be most common in adolescents, uh,
but it is very common in young adults and
becomes less common as we age. But it can
occur at any age. There's heaps of anecdotal stories
about people in nursing homes falling in love, for
example. Um, BUT that's really all we know. Uh,
IT'S, it's the one area that, uh, we need
to do a lot more research in.
Do we have any idea if it can occur
in infants? I mean, what, what's the earliest age
or ages it can occur?
Um, SO the two studies that looked at juveniles,
we're looking at sort of 8 to 12 year
olds, roughly age range. So, um, by then, it
seems to, um. Uh, IT'S feasible that infants could
fall in love. Uh, I see no necessary reason
why not, except for that perhaps when they're very
young infants, they're so focused on the mother that
the, uh, circuitry and, and brain and hormones are,
are not, uh, able to focus their attention on,
on someone else. They're just focusing on the mother.
So I suspect once they're no longer enthralled with
their mother, uh, it's a possibility.
Mhm. What functions does romantic love serve?
Uh, SO, like all types of love, uh, romantic
love plays an important role in survival of the
species. It essentially creates a team of two, instead
of a single mother, uh, that can facilitate survival
of the pregnant mother and the newborn infant. Uh,
SO, at, at its grandest level, it promotes survival
of offspring. Uh, THAT being said, romantic love is
a bit unique among types of love in that
it serves 4 very specific reproductive functions. So once
again, with Jeff Kushnick and I, we, we looked
at all the research and we sort of came
up with 4 broad functions that romantic love serves.
So it plays a role in Maho. When we're
in love with someone, usually, we're pretty sure we
want to be in a romantic relationship with that
person. It plays a role in courtship, so sometimes
we fall in love with someone before we're in
a romantic relationship, and it motivates us to pursue
them and court them and make them be our
partner. It plays a role in sex. So couples
in love have a lot more sex than couples
who are not in love. And in our evolutionary
history, that would have usually resulted in pregnancy and,
and procreation and so forth. It also plays a
role in paired bond formation. So it binds two
people together and gives them the shared experiences and
triggers the neurochemical processes required to form those really
long-term bonds that can last years or decades or
even a lifetime.
Uh, SO what is the relationship then between romantic
love and pair bonding? I mean, when we see
pair bonding in a particular species, should we look
at it as a sign or as a potential
sign of romantic love being present there?
Um, SO this is a difficult and slightly complex
question to answer. And I know Helen Fisher got
asked this question, uh, a heck of a lot.
Um, SO one of the functions of romantic love
is pair bond formation. And in humans, uh, social
monogamy and pair bonds mean that the beginning stage
where we create these relationships involves romantic love. That
being said, there's the possibility that That when romantic
love emerged, it may not have emerged in the
context of pair bonds, and it may have actually
emerged as a sort of seasonal bonding. So you
would have experienced romantic love for a period of,
who knows, weeks or months or maybe a year
or so. Uh, AND then at the end of
it, people would part ways and go the other
way. So in modern romantic love, pair bonds and
romantic love are intricately entwined. Um, THAT being said,
if you fall in love, it doesn't necessarily mean
you will form those long-term pair bonds.
OK, so this, I imagine, will also be a
tricky question or complicated question. Is romantic love an
evolved adaptation?
I think it can better be described as a
suite of adaptations and byproducts. So, David Bars in
a book chapter in the Psychology of love and
then updated in subsequent, uh, editions, described love in
romantic relationships generally as a suite of adaptations. Uh,
AND in 2021, Jeff Kushnick and I extended this
to suggest that romantic love, in particular, was a
suite of adaptations and byproducts. Essentially, romantic. I've served
so many unique specific functions and broad general functions,
and involves so many different mechanisms that it, it,
you, you can't consider it as a single adaptation.
It's an amalgamation of a bunch of adaptations that
all function together, uh, really well. Uh, AND we
added the byproducts, uh, component on too, because we
think there's some aspects that might have just piggybacked
on. Other adaptations, uh, that are features of romantic
love. So things perhaps like elevated mood might have
just piggybacked on activity of the Msolimbic pathway or
the behavioral activation system, and, uh, sleep variations. People
in love, many of them experience variations to their
sleep. Uh, AND those may not be adaptations, those
might just be byproducts. So I, I think it's,
uh, it's fair to call it a suite of
adaptations and byproducts.
Um, I, I mean, could you tell us more
about what these adaptations would be?
Um, SO, to, to answer that, uh, you have
to think about the, the functions, uh, that it
serves. So, um, Females in the animal kingdom tend
to be very choosy, uh, is the term used,
uh, in terms of, of picking a mate. Uh,
THEY'RE unlikely to want to engage in sexual activity
because they bear the highest cost of pregnancy and,
and reproduction. Romantic love serves as a sort of
mechanism to increase females receptivity to Uh, romantic or
sexual advances. Um, WITHOUT romantic love, there's a, uh,
a lot of people that would basically not enter
a romantic relationship, or, um, not, uh, have sex.
Uh, ONE way of thinking about this is Frank's,
uh, theory from 1988, uh, which basically says romantic
love is A commitment device. Uh, ANOTHER thing it
does is it binds two people together, and it
makes somebody invested in that relationship so that they're
not going to go around and try to find
another mate, uh, quickly, uh, a better mate, and
so forth, so people can plan and, and invest
in each other. Uh, SO those are two, adaptations
that, uh, I, I think have occurred. But honestly,
David David Buss says, um, Done some good work
on love and romantic relationships. He's got a whole
heap of, uh, of functions of romantic love. It,
it overcomes a number of adaptive challenges. Um, IN
the paper I've written with Jeff Kushnick, uh, I
think we, we've got about 50 different things that
romantic love does. It's, uh, it's absolutely amazing.
Evolutionarily speaking, do we know how old romantic love
is?
No, uh, but we can make some educated guesses.
So the problem is that romantic love doesn't leave
a fossil record. Um, WE can't just go back
and find a species and say, Oh, look, this
one was experiencing romantic love. Um, BUT we can
make a number of educated guesses, and it's, it's
sort of complicated how we get there. So coming
back to your question about pair bonds and, uh,
romantic love, um, we have to first consider whether
we can trace the timing of the emergence of
the precursors to romantic love, or where these Uh,
adaptations merged together and started looking like modern romantic
love. Um, SO we know that romantic love serves
a role in pair bond formation, and that's, uh,
associated with social monogamy. We know that social monogamy
is associated with the reduction in sexual dimorphism. So
species that are socially monogamous, there's different, uh, less
difference in stature and weight between females and males
than in, um, species that are not socially monogamous.
And, We can trace this in the fossil record.
It looks like a substantial reduction in sexual dimorphism
first emerged in the vicinity of 2 million years
ago in the hominin lineage, around Homo erectus or
mid Pleistocene, Homo. Um, uh, AND that seems to
have been sustained throughout subsequent species, and, uh, maximizing
its, uh, minimizing, sorry, it's difference, uh, around, um,
Homo hydrogen in the vicinity of half a million
years ago. So this suggests that, Uh, an important
aspect of romantic love was present at least 2
million years ago. Uh, THAT being said, it's possible
that romantic love, something that looks like what we
experienced today, may have emerged earlier as a form
of seasonal bond, and that may not have been
associated with a reduction in sexual dimorphism. So it's
possible it could have been earlier, but it, it's
no later than about 2 million years ago. Now,
in terms of what modern romantic love looks like,
I think one of the driving selective pressures in
making it look the way it does is something
called altriciality. So that's essentially a tendency for humans
to be born almost premature because of our big
brains, they wouldn't be able to fit through the
birth canal. So we give birth to offspring with
small underdeveloped brains who are basically useless for the
1st 9 months. Um, AND I think the reason
that romantic love lasts in the vicinity. Of 18
months is because, uh, you would have pregnancy that
would last in the vicinity of 9 months, and
then this altritial state for, uh, on average about
9 months. Uh, AND, and that would have extended
the length of time that people would have experienced
romantic love. So, uh, I suspect, uh, we know
that tritiality emerged in the vicinity of 1 to
2 million years ago. So sometime in 1 to
2 million year time frame ago, uh, it started
to look probably a lot like what we experienced
today.
So you mentioned 2 million years ago, then that
puts us at the time of uh Homo erectus,
right?
That's correct. That's that's the best.
Yeah. And I mean, how do we study romantic
love in uh extinct hominin species and also how
do we study it in ancient Homo sapiens? Uh
ARE there any, for example, archaeological cues we can
look at?
Um, SO, so like I said, sexual dimorphism is
the, the main indicator of social monogamy. Um, AND
that's where most of my thinking comes from. But
there's other changes in sexual dimorphism that, uh, occur,
um, as well, such as, um, dental features. I
think the canines reduce substantially, at least in males,
uh, in species that are socially monogamous. And, um,
Helen Fisher actually speculated. Based on, uh, a reduction
in dental, um, dimorphism and size, uh, that it
might have emerged in the vicinity of 4.4 million
years ago with Ardipithecus ramidus. Since she postulated that,
um, we've got a lot more information about that
species, and, uh, there's now questions as to whether
it was either a hominid. So we are limited
by what we can see in the fossil record,
um, and uh unfortunately that means we're never going
to have a clear understanding of the evolution of
romantic love in humans.
And what do we know about romantic love's phylogeny?
I mean, do we have a good understanding of
its phylogenetic history?
Uh, SO believe it or not, that's it, despite
what I just said, uh, that's the thing we
have the most comprehensive understanding of, um, and that's
because it's really, really simple. So, chimpanzees and bonobos
are our two closest living, uh, relatives, uh, and
neither. OF those species display a state that's comparable
to romantic love. Uh, AS a result, we're pretty
confident that romantic love emerged after the hominin split
with the last common ancestor with those two species.
So romantic love emerged in a hominin. We're the
only living hominins around. There's a straight line from
that ancestor to us. Now, there would have been,
uh, some branches out with some dead ends from
our cousins who didn't make it. Um, Neanderthals, for
example, almost certainly experienced romantic love as well. Um,
BUT in terms of living species, it's a straight
line from that hominin ancestor, probably Homo erectus, to
us.
Are there because you've talked there about uh primates
and specifically great apes, but are there mammalian antecedents
to romantic love? And if so, what would those
be?
Um, I think there are, and I think that's,
uh, a useful way of thinking about things. This,
this idea was first, um, proposed by Helen Fisher,
uh, in, if it wasn't a '98 paper, it
was a, a 2000 paper, um, or 2001 paper,
I think. Uh, BASICALLY, she said that there are
three emotional systems common to all mammals. So sexual
desire, courtship attraction, and attachment. Um, AND so sexual
desire is exactly what you think it would be.
It, it drives us to become aroused and, and
engage in sexual activity. Courtship attraction is that initial
attraction that motivates, uh, approach behaviors to, to pursue
a mate, and attachment is associated with what you
would find in, in pair bonds or in mother-infant
love. Um, AND, and she basically said that courtship
attraction was romantic love. Uh, AND therefore, romantic love
has evolved out of, uh, an antecedent that is
common to all mammals. Now, Helen was a bit
wrong, uh, about courtship attraction and that being romantic
love, but the general idea that these pre-existing mechanisms
or systems, uh, that are common to mammals, uh,
uh, are used in romantic love is true. So
4% of, uh, mammals, pair bond, And something like
30% of primate species pair bond, because pair bonding
is associated with romantic love, it seems to indicate
that mammals to some extent and certainly primates, have
the infrastructure needed to engage in pair bond formation.
um, AND that's almost certainly the case.
So what would be, or do you already have
an account of how romantic love evolved from its
antecedents or precursors up to uh the more modern
manifestations of romantic love?
So it's sort of. So it's a really good
question, uh, and an interesting question and something I've
thought a lot about. Uh, SO the topic of
my PhD thesis is the evolutionary history of romantic
love. And so I need to just be clear,
before I started my thesis 5 years ago or
so, we knew basically nothing about the evolutionary history
of romantic love. I, I know Helen Fisher was
renowned as the world's ending. Expert on the evolution
of romantic love. But if you read her academic
texts and even her popular science work, she actually
didn't talk at all about the evolutionary history of
romantic love. She spoke about the evolutionary history of
pair bonds. She spoke about, um, the functions of
romantic love. But when it comes to just the
nitty gritty of, of romantic love, uh, there, there
was almost nothing written about it. Um, SO, There's
two scenarios in which romantic love evolved. Either it
emerged as a type of seasonal bond, and that
would have lasted a matter of months or maybe
a year or something that probably would have been
quite intense, and then sometime after that, pair bonds
evolved out of that. Um, THE second scenario is
that pair bonds evolved, and there was this short
period, maybe a matter of hours or days at
the beginning, that resulted in pair bond formation. And
over time, as a result of altrutiality, probably extended.
Um, THERE'S reasons to believe one or the other
might be likely, but having read what I've read,
I'm not convinced that one or the other is,
is probably more likely. So at the beginning, there
would have been a series of mutations. Um, uh,
AND I think mutation, because social monogamy in primates
is pretty bimodal. You can either tell a species
is either socially monogamous or, or it's not. I,
I know there's some people like Augustine Fuentes, who,
who argue social monogamy is a continuum, but I
think in, in his work, he sort of conflates
sexual and social monogamy a little bit and doesn't
acknowledge that other behavioral repertoires can attach to, um,
To pair bonding or socially monogamous behaviors. So, like,
it's unlikely to have resulted from, from genetic drift
or those other processes. I think, I think there
were mutations. And then natural selection played a role
because these mutations conveyed some sort of reproductive advantage.
And as I've suggested, that's probably going to be
survival of the pregnant mother and survival of the
infant during the first altricial, um, stage. Um, THE
other thing we know is that the species that
first developed social monogamy or possibly romantic love was
not territorial. So some of the biological anthropology research
I've done has found that territoriality does not precede
the evolution of social monogamy in non-human primates. So
that's, um, potentially selective pressure, if you will, or,
or some other factor. That they may have contributed
to it. Um, THERE'S other theories about what selective
pressures might have driven the evolution of social monogamy,
um, or romantic love. So like infanticide or dispersed
females or solitary females. But there's, uh, uncertainty in
the literature, and we really don't know what, what
the big drivers were. Um, NOW, another thing that
we do know is that sexual selection, probably from
early on, uh, started to play a role. Uh,
SO I've undertaken a, a study with Severy Luoto
and Phil Caberard that looked at sex differences in
romantic love. And, uh, we looked at people from
33 different countries, and we were able to find
a number of small but meaningful differences in the
expression of romantic love. So we looked at things
like how often people fall in love. Um, WHEN
individuals fall in love relative to when they started
their romantic relationship. Uh, HOW intensely they experience romantic
love, how much they obsess about their partner, or
think obsessively about their partner, and commitment. Uh, AND
we found a number of small, meaningful differences. I,
I think the most notable is probably that males
fall in love about 1 month earlier than do
females. So in our sample, we found that men
fall in love, on average, about 1 month after
starting a romantic relationship, whereas women fall in love
about 2 months after starting a romantic relationship. Uh,
AND we think this was, uh, as a result
of sexual selection, basically because romantic love serves as
an honest signal of commitment. Uh, LIKE I suggested
before, females are choosier. They're not going to want
to engage in sexual activity with someone who isn't
going to help support them, uh, through, uh, a
period of pregnancy, and, and In the, the infancy
of the child. So women or females started, uh,
choosing to mate with men who displayed romantic love
a little bit earlier. This was heritable, and their
offspring, in turn, the males would fall in love
a bit earlier than the females and so forth.
Um, SO there's a few other things we know.
So, Uh, variation exists in the expression of romantic
love, we know that, uh, One of the elements
of, for romantic love, uh, for evolution to occur
is variation. And I've done a study with Phil
Cavanagh, again, that basically was able to demonstrate there's
extreme variation in terms of the intensity of romantic
love, uh, obsessive thinking about a loved one, commitment
and frequency of sex. So this sort of indicates
that, uh, it's possible that aspects of romantic love
might still be under selection. Um, BUT honestly, other
than that, we know very little. It's really hard
to study, and people just haven't been looking at
this for, well, basically since the beginning. I'm, I'm
genuinely the first to, uh, have done a systematic
investigation of, of how romantic love evolved.
Uh, AND where does that variation that you mentioned
there stem from? I mean, does it have anything
to do with individual differences or is it something
else?
Yeah, so it's definitely individual differences. It's largely driven
by biology and genes. Um, AND, um, it probably
is colored by culture or the experience with the
other partner. So, for example, if I have a
partner who likes to have a lot of sex,
I'm more likely to have a lot of sex.
So there, there's, uh, environmental factors that do play
a role, but I think a lot of this
is driven by genetics. Uh, 11 thing I would
say is we don't know for certain if there's
any, uh, reproductive advantages to any particular, um, variation,
uh, that we've found. I suspect what we might
find is that the couples that like to have
a lot of sex. Um, ARE probably more likely
to accidentally get pregnant. So in the modern environment,
the variation or the phenotype that has a lot
of sex, uh, may be, um, more reproductively advantaged,
and over the next 10 or 20 or 30
1000 years, we might find that humans evolved to
have a lot more sex than we used to,
uh, when we're in love.
Mhm. So tell us a little bit more about
your hypothesis that romantic love evolved by co-opting mother
infant bonding.
Yeah, so, um, Like I said, the, the topic
of my thesis is, uh, the evolution of romantic
love. And I wrote a review article using Tinbergen's
framework, uh, with Jeff Kushnick, which detailed the, the
four approaches in romantic love. And I, I needed
to write some other papers, basically. Um, AND I
thought, uh, in, in that review, uh, I introduced
two evolutionary theories, uh, Helen Fisher's theory of Independent
Emotion systems. And Larry Young's uh theory that pair
bonds evolved by co-opting mother-infant bonding. Um, SO I
basically read everything Helen Fisher had written on the
topic. Uh, AND I realized she, she didn't actually
talk much about the evolutionary history of romantic love.
And, and some of the stuff she had to
say was quite speculative, and, and the research had
progressed, so she, she was incorrect about a, a,
a number of things. And, and I turned my
attention to Larry Young's work. Uh, AND it seems
eminently reasonable that pair bonds may have evolved by
co-opting mother infant bonding. So co-option is the evolutionary
process whereby a trait takes on a new function.
Um, SO think, for example, um, a, an umbrella.
Um, IT'S used to keep the rain off our
heads, but you can also give it a new
function to keep the sun out of our eyes.
Um, SO that's sort of an example by co-option.
Anyway, I, I, I did a bit of reading,
and I, I, I did a bit more reading
about what we know about the psychology and neuroscience
and endocrinology of romantic love. I found that some
people had actually sort of tested, um, Larry Young's
theory. Um, AND there were a number of studies
that had compared. Uh, ROMANTIC love with maternal love.
Uh, SO I thought, yeah, there's, there's enough here
to write a seminal paper considering whether romantic love
in particular might have evolved, uh, by co-opting mother
infant bonding. So, in that hypothesis paper, I start
off by looking at the psychology of romantic love
and mother infant bonding. And there was a, a
paper by Lekman and Mays in 1999, which basically
considered the romantic, uh, the psychology of, uh, Both
mother infant bonding and romantic love. And they found,
uh, a number of interesting similarities. Um, BOTH are
altered mental states, both involve obsessive thoughts, both involve
longing for rec reciprocity, um, both involve idealization of
the other proximity seeking and time-limited duration. Psychologically speaking,
um, that these two states look similar. So then
I had a look at the neuroimaging research, and
there was actually a paper by Bartels and Zzey.
Now, Bartels and Zey in 2000 were the first
to undertake an FMRI, uh, study of romantic love.
And they followed this up in 2004 by looking
at mothers with newborn infants, and they compared them,
and they found a number of similarities in regions
rich in oxytocin and basopressin. There's also been a,
a, a few meta-analysis, so Ortegan colleagues did a,
Uh, meta-analysis of a handful of studies of love,
and they found similarities across all types of love.
She and colleagues in 2022, uh, compared 9, studies
of romantic love, and they found activity, uh, of
the left ventral tegmental area was common to both
romantic love and mother-infant bonding. And there was a,
a great meta-analysis by Rigo and colleagues that, uh,
considered 12 studies of mothers, of newborn. And the
way they described the neural activity in mother infant
bonding or maternal love was very similar to the
way uh people would describe romantic love. So this
involved in particular structures like the ventral tegmental area,
amygdala, striatum, and insular. Um, THERE'S also similarities in
the endocrinology, so there's, um, strong empirical and theoretical
reasons to believe that dopamine, oxytocin, and bata endorphin
are involved in in both states. Um, SO, The
similarities were there, I in in my paper, I
basically outline what the similarities are, and then I
sort of use a bit of Fisher's model. Uh,
AND evidence from Prairie voles and evidence from neuroimaging
to sort of argue, uh, for a, a new
revised mechanistic model of romantic love. So, uh, I
basically say that romantic love evolved by co-opting three
specific systems from mother-infant bonding. So these are bonding
attraction, which, uh, focuses energies on the loved one
and promotes caregiving and proximity seeking. Uh, IT co-opted,
uh, obsessive thinking. So in mother infant bonding, thinking
about the baby a lot stops you from forgetting
the baby, so you can keep it alive. It's
function in romantic love is a bit uncertain. I'm,
I'm not really clear, but it's obviously important cause
it's still there. Uh, AND it also co-opted attachment,
which is, uh, that ability to create and maintain
bonds. And these three systems combined with two pre-existing
reproductive systems. So it combined with courtship attraction, which
Helen Fisher has, has detailed, uh, uh, uh. A
lot. Uh, AND it also merged with sexual desire.
So I brought these reproductive aspects in with the,
the love that's similar to mother-infant bonding, and it,
it creates this whole suite of adaptations and byproducts.
Uh, Helen Fisher read a, uh, draft of the
paper, and Larry Young, uh, read the published paper.
Unfortunately, both of those people passed away last year,
uh, quite sadly, but Larry Young said the paper
was awesome. So I'll take that to mean there's
at least some scientific usefulness uh with what I've
managed to write.
Great. So, uh, let me ask you now, this
studying romantic love tell us anything about what would
potentially be Our predominant mating system. I mean, because
there's a very complicated, complex discussion surrounding this issue.
I mean, whether we are predominantly monogamous or polygamous
and if we are polygamous, uh, I mean, uh,
I, I, I wouldn't imagine that anyone would say
that we are predominantly polyandros because that only occurs
in a At best, a handful of societies in
certain very specific ecological circumstances, it can occur, but
it's certainly not uh that common. So, uh, or
even another alternative would be polyamory. I mean, does
studying romantic love, uh, or can it inform us
about that? Or can it uh contribute anything to
that sort of discussion?
So I think it can contribute a bit, but
it's definitely not going to answer the question. So
humans are amazing, uh in that our human mating
repertoire is full of variety. Um, SO, um, some
people can do polyamory, some people will be single,
some people will have a series of, of short-term
trips throughout their life. Some people will be in
a romantic relationship for their entire life. Some people
will be polygynist. Um, ALL these things are possible,
um, that some people don't experience romantic love, um,
reinforces that even singledom is probably one of the
Variety of human, human mating that humans exist. I,
I think it's important to recognize that even in
a polygynous society, there's a lot of social monogamy
that goes on. So men at the top, men
at the top have many wives, men at the
bottom have no wives, and there's a whole bunch
in the middle with one. Maybe 2, but a
lot, a lot of 1. SO I, I tend
to think that social monogamy has won out. It
certainly interacts with culture in the modern world, to
have one out. It's the norm and legally enforced
in, in a lot of cultures. Um, I'm happy
to back social monogamy as, as the predominant, uh,
mating system in modern humans, at least, uh, as
we experience now. And romantic love tells us just
that little bit of extra information that might inform
that debate.
And what are the relative contributions of genes slash
biology and culture to romantic love and how it
gets expressed?
Yeah, probably not the best to answer that. I'm
really poorly read on uh the contribution that culture
makes to, Uh, behavior. Uh, IT'S definitely one of
my weak points. You've got to remember, I'm just
a PhD student. I haven't been doing this long
enough to, to be really well read on things.
Um, I know that there's some studies, mainly from
the University of Bratislav, um, uh, um, Pyotr Sorakowski
and Marta Koval, um, have done a number of
studies looking at things like modernization, collectivism, And gender
equality. And all those national level cultural indicators seem
to influence how intensely people express passion, intimacy, and
commitment, uh, when they're in romantic relationships. I, um,
use this, and I, I've got some preliminary evidence
showing that the more gender equal, um, a country
is, the less intensely. Um, PEOPLE experience romantic love.
Um, SO there certainly are indications that cultural factors
can play a role in how romantic love expresses.
Now, in terms of the, the nitty gritty of
what culture can do, I know Victor Karen Dashev
has written two books on, on culture and love
generally. Uh, AND he does consider romantic love in,
in bits and pieces. And he really emphasizes the
cultural influence that, um, The, the, the, the influence
that culture can have on expressing love. Uh, THAT
being said, my reading of everything today leads me
to believe that romantic love is largely and primarily
driven by biology. It's got all these common threads
that you would find across cultures. Um, AND the
culture sort of adds that color. Uh, TO the
expression of, of romantic love. Um, IT'S, it's very
important and it can't happen without it. And obviously,
the genes and culture are going to interact, uh,
in, in, in particular ways, and you're going to
get expression in all sorts of ways. Um, BUT,
uh, uh, uh, it's very biologically driven. It's a
very powerful force.
By the way, I, I, I don't, I'm not
sure if you also study this kind of issues
specifically, but do, do you know if there's any
connection and what that connection would be between romantic
love and marriage because, I mean, there are people
who study marriage specifically as a so. INSTITUTION, let's
say, particularly anthropologists, and then there are people who
study romantic love and mating systems and things like
that. Sometimes, uh, marriage intersects with some of uh
what people study when it comes to mating systems,
but, uh, I mean, is there any link there?
Um, SO I haven't read enough to be able
to answer that question, but I, I can maybe
make a comment about how romantic love might lead
to marriage, mediated by pair bonds, for example. So
I've got a, my, the romantic love survey's got
a longitudinal component. And I did a preliminary study
seeing if any of the features of romantic love
were associated with breaking up six months later. Nothing.
Nothing associated with romantic love, um, was associated with
breaking up six months later. So, I, I think,
um, Whatever it is that makes us continue into
long-term pair bonds might be, Partly biological. There's been
one FMRI study that has looked at, um, predictors
of staying together 40 months later, and they found
4 structures, activity in 4 structures was associated with
staying together. Um, IN terms of, of what gets
people to turn marriage into, uh, sorry, romantic love
into marriage, uh, I, I really don't have a
clue, but that would be a fascinating area to
study.
Yeah. So let me ask you now about a
specific aspect of romantic love. I think you've probably
already touched on it earlier, but does romantic love
lead to increased sexual activity?
Uh, ALMOST certainly. Um, SO like I said earlier,
one of the functions of remaining Glove is actually
sex. Uh, SO we, we know from representative studies
of the United States that long-term married couples have
sex about one time per week. I mean, it,
there's obviously a lot of variation. Some people are
not at all, and some people are a lot
more, but on average, they found in this large
representative study, the long-term married couples. Have sex about
once per week. Data that I've got from the
Romantic Love survey, which admittedly is young adults, so
you would presume they would have sex a little
bit more. Um, BUT they're having sex when they're
in love, on average about 3 times per week.
That's a fair bit more than, than once a
week. Um, I think we can Pretty confidently say
that uh romantic love causes people to have more
sex, obviously when they're in a romantic uh relationship.
So, is there anything else about romantic love, uh,
you would like to tell us about that I
might have missed in my questions,
or? Uh, SO it's an incredibly understudied area for
something that is probably a human universal, as the
foundation for romantic relationship and family formation throughout almost
the entirety of the world. There is a lot
of low hanging fruit. Researchers who are interested in
delving into a new, interesting topical area. Um, I'd
really encourage you to get on board. If you've
got any questions, send me an email. I'll, I'll
tell you how you can get involved. It's a
fascinating, interesting area of research. Um, IT, it, it's
an opportunity for people to, to make their careers,
uh, uh, on a new, new area. Um, GET
on board. It's, it's absolutely fascinating.
Yes, it certainly is. And where can people find
you on the internet?
Uh, SO I've got a website, Adam Bode, A
D A M B O D E.net. That's got
my, uh, CV and, uh, you can see all
the papers I've published and, uh, a bit of
information about me. I also, um, run an entity
called Love Research.info. L O V E R E
S E A R C H. Info. Um, I
put out a monthly email update of the latest
scientific, uh, research and other relevant information conferences and
that sort of stuff. And we also host an
annual symposium. So anybody who's got, uh, any interest
in romantic love can come and watch that. Um,
uh, AND if you've got any research to present,
you can present there as well. So, um, have
a look into that.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been fun
to talk with you.
Thanks very much, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Curriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin. And
yoursnacht, a special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.